Aidan Murphy (born 17 September 1967) is an English former professional footballer who made 123 appearances in the Football League. He is now a youth soccer coach in Greensboro, North Carolina, United States. ==Player== Murphy, a midfielder, signed a professional contract with Manchester United on his 17th birthday. He was part of the FA Youth Cup team that played Manchester City in the 1986 FA Youth Cup Final. In October 1986 he spent a month on loan with Lincoln City, making his league debut in the 4–1 home defeat to Hartlepool United on 5 October 1986. In February 1987, he linked up with Oldham Athletic, again on a one-month loan deal, but failed to make a league appearance. In the summer of 1987, Murphy was released by Manchester United and joined Crewe Alexandra where he was to spend the next five seasons. He had 113 league appearances. A short spell with Scarborough at the beginning of the 1992–1993 season signalled the end of his league career and he dropped into the non-league ranks to enjoy short spells with Woking, Mossley and Witton Albion. In 1993, he emigrated to America and joined the Greensboro-based Carolina Dynamo for their inaugural season. He went on to spend three seasons in their team before moving on to spells with Minnesota Rampage and Raleigh Flyers."Flyers begin first season in A-League The News & Observer Saturday 12 April 1997 On 19 March 1998, he joined the Minnesota Thunder."SPORTS TRANSACTIONS Vero Beach Press Journal (FL) Thursday, 19 March 1998 He retired at the end of the season. ==Coaching== Murphy moved into coaching, becoming a staff coach with Greensboro Youth Soccer in 1998. In 2001, he was appointed Boys Youth Development Director for GYS. He has also been on the staff of the NCYSA Olympic development program since Spring 2000. He moved to the South Charlotte Soccer Association in May 2006 but returned to Greensboro in October 2006 due to a family illness. He is currently a coach with Greensboro United Soccer Association. ==References== ==External links== *Carolina Dynamo All- time player stats Category:1967 births Category:Living people Category:English footballers Category:Manchester United F.C. players Category:Lincoln City F.C. players Category:Oldham Athletic A.F.C. players Category:Crewe Alexandra F.C. players Category:Scarborough F.C. players Category:Woking F.C. players Category:Witton Albion F.C. players Category:Mossley A.F.C. players Category:English Football League players Category:Footballers from Manchester Category:USISL players Category:North Carolina Fusion U23 players Category:Raleigh Express players Category:Minnesota Thunder players Category:Men's association football midfielders Category:English expatriate sportspeople in the United States Category:Expatriate soccer players in the United States Category:English expatriate footballers