Rabbi Abba bar Memel (or , Jewish Virtual Library), or Abba Memel,In the full corpus of the Bar Ilan Responsa Project, version 16, this spelling appears only in two places: Shut Mahari ben Lev 2:11; Shut Shevet Sofer, Orach Haim 57. (Hebrew: רבי אבא בר ממל or אבא מר ממל) was a rabbi of the Land of Israel of the second and third generation of amoraim. He is mentioned often in discussions with the Amora sages of Tiberias Beit Midrash, headed by R. Yochanan bar Nafchai.e Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Kiddushin, 62b and his students, R. Abbahu, R. Eleazar ben Pedat,Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Bezah, 13b and his main scholarly opponent, Rav Zeira.Babylonian Talmud, Tractate Sukkah, 21b; Tractate Hulin, 129a; Tractate Kiddushin, 9b; etc. He is also mentioned along with Rabbi AmmiBabylonian Talmud, Tractate Nedarim, 21a and Rabbi AssiBabylonian Talmud, Tractate Hulin, 129a who were considered his masters, probably after the death of R. Yochanan bar Nafcha. ==Teachings== In three propositions he limited and rendered practically harmless the application of the Gezerah Shawah, the second of the thirteen hermeneutic rules of R. Ismael, which otherwise might easily have led to arbitrary ritual decisions.Yerushalmi Pesachim 6 33a His proposed reforms were never carried into practice, no other amora having joined him to form a valid legislative body.Yerushalmi Moed Kattan 2 81b Among his aggadic teachings, the most significant is one on the names of God:Exodus Rabbah 3 :"God spoke to Moses: 'Thou desirest to know My name, I AM THAT I AMExodus 3:14 That is, I am called according to my revealed activities. When I am judging mankind, I am called Elohim; when I am going out to war against the wicked, I am called Tzevaot; when I am holding judgment in suspense over the sins of men, I am called El Shaddai; when showing mercy to the world, I am called YHWH, because this name de-notes the quality of mercy in God'.Exodus 34:6" ==References== ==External links== Category:Talmud rabbis of the Land of Israel