Antoine Blondin (11 April 1922 – 7 June 1991) was a French writer. He belonged to the literary group called the Hussards. He was also a sports columnist in L'Équipe. Blondin also wrote under the name Tenorio. ==Biography== Blondin was the son of a poet, Germaine Blondin, whose name he took, and of a printer's proof-reader. He earned a degree in philosophy the Sorbonne after studying at the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris and the Lycée Pierre Corneille in Rouen.Lycée Pierre Corneille de Rouen - History He became very close to Roland Laudenbach during World War II. He was sent to Germany in 1942 for compulsory war work during the German occupation of World War II.Encres Vagabondes - Memoire of Antoine Blondin by par Claude Chanaud The experience inspired his first novel, L'Europe buissonnière,La Table Ronde, Paris which appeared in 1949. It won the Prix des Deux Magots, named after a literary café in Paris, and brought him the friendship of authors such as Marcel Aymé and Roger Nimier and the philosopher, Jean-Paul Sartre. In 1953, the young critic Bernard Frank dubbed the novelists Roger Nimier, Jacques Laurent, and Blondin as "les Hussards," a title which stuck. The Hussars were characterized by their shared right-wing literary heritage, youthful irreverence towards leftist intellectuals, and a commitment to "art for art's sake." Blondin's right-wing leanings did not, however, prevent a friendship with the socialist François Mitterrand, for whom he later came to vote.L'Humanite - Sports- 17 July 2003 - Profile of Blondin - Chronicler of the Tour His next novels, Les Enfants du bon Dieu and L'Humeur vagabonde confirmed a distinctive style which critics placed between Stendhal and Jules Renard. Turns of phrase such as "After the second world war, the trains started moving again. I profited from that by leaving my wife and children" and "I have stayed very thin, and so has my body of work," are exemplary of Blondin's affinity for wordplay and humor. The themes of friendship, bohemianism, and the historical shock of World War II also held a prominent place in his fiction. After publishing the well-received novel Un Singe en hiver, Blondin remained an active journalist, but the death of his best friend Roger Nimier prompted him to largely abandon writing fiction for over a decade. Nonetheless, he won the 1977 Prix Goncourt de la Nouvelle for the short story collection Quat'saisons. Blondin wrote press columns supporting the right in politics. He was a monarchist and wrote for monarchist publications such as Aspects de la France, La Nation Française and Rivarol. Although he was associated with Action Française intellectuals and the Maurrassian right during the beginning of his career, he distanced himself from politics later in his life. He also wrote sports features for L'Équipe, for which he covered 27 editions of the Tour de France and seven Olympic Games. The Tour de France winner, Bernard Hinault, said: :He never interviews anybody but just records his impressions of what he's seen and what he feels. Sometimes René FalletFrench novelist, 1927-1983) was with him. They both love the Tour and, in simple language, they turn it into a modern epic, a troubador's song, a crusade, as they describe its beauty. The most banal event becomes significant to Blondin; he has only to see it and write about it. He raised the status of the Tour by giving it his own cachet; it became a myth to be renewed every year. No matter how predictable the race, he could maintain the interest in it.Hinault, Bernard (1989), Memories of the Peloton, Springfield, UK Blondin was a bon vivant known for heavy drinking in the Parisian district of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, playing at bull-fighting with passing cars and racking up numerous arrests for drunkenness. He chronicled this aspect of his life in the autofictional novel, Monsieur Jadis ou L'École du Soir. He was frequently pursued for unpaid taxes. Pierre Chany said: :He really did owe a lot and, frankly, his situation was becoming serious; we even wondered if he wasn't going to prison. Faced with that, his friends called Maître BertrandJacques Bertrand, a Parisian barrister known for his work for sportsmen to the rescue. Bertrand managed to organise a summit meeting with the general inspector of taxes - the highest man in his profession, the equivalent of a minister. Full of good will, this man said: :"Alors, M. Blondin, I understand that you want to come to terms..." :"Let's come to terms!" Antoine said coldly. :"How much would you be able to put into your account?" :"A tear, monsieur..." Naturally, the man threw him out. It was poor FrançoiseBlondin's second wife who had to make another interview to sort it out.Penot, Christophe (1996), Pierre Chany, l'homme aux 50 Tours de France, Cristel, France A literary prize, for the best sports article, is awarded in his name.Prix Litteraire - The Antoine Blondine Prize ==References== Category:1922 births Category:1991 deaths Category:Writers from Paris Category:People affiliated with Action Française Category:Cycling journalists Category:Tour de France journalists Category:Cycling in France Category:Prix des Deux Magots winners Category:Prix Goncourt de la nouvelle recipients Category:Prix Interallié winners Category:Lycée Pierre-Corneille alumni Category:Lycée Louis-le-Grand alumni Category:Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Category:20th-century French novelists Category:20th-century French male writers Category:French male novelists Category:French male non-fiction writers Category:20th-century French journalists Category:French World War II forced labourers