Khan Mir Ahmad Yar Khan Ahmedzai (Balochi, ; 1902–1979), commonly referred to as Yar Khan, was the last Khan of Kalat, a princely state within the British Raj and then the Dominion of Pakistan, serving from 10 September 1933 to 14 October 1955, when his state was annexed and integrated into West Pakistan. ==Life== In the 1920s, Ahmad Yar served as an agent of the British intelligence service, reporting on Russian influence and the spread of pro- Marxist sympathy among the poorer local subjects. He assumed the throne of the Khanate of Kalat in 1933 and was decorated by the British in the 1936 New Year Honours as a Knight Grand Commander of the Most Eminent Order of the Indian Empire (GCIE). With the withdrawal of the British from the mainland South Asia in August 1947, the Indian Independence Act passed by the British Parliament, provided that the princely states which had existed alongside but outside British India were released from all their subsidiary alliances and other treaty obligations to the British, while at the same time the British withdrew from their obligations to defend the states. The rulers were left to decide whether to accede to one of the newly independent states of India or Pakistan or to remain independent outside both.Ishtiaq Ahmed, State, Nation and Ethnicity in Contemporary South Asia (London & New York, 1998), p. 99 As stated by Sardar Patel at a press conference in January 1948, "As you are all aware, on the lapse of Paramountcy every Indian State became a separate independent entity."R. P. Bhargava, The Chamber of Princes (Northern Book Centre, 1991) p. 313 Muhammad Ali Jinnah was Yar Khan's legal adviser in the early 1940s. Jinnah persuaded Yar Khan to agree to accede to Pakistan, but the Khan stalled for time. After a period of negotiations, Khan finally acceded to Pakistan on 27 March 1948. Yar Khan’s younger brother, Prince Agha Abdul Karim Baloch, revolted against his decision and took refuge in Afghanistan to wage an armed resistance against Pakistan in Kalat, with little support from the rest of Balochista. He finally surrendered to Pakistan in 1950. Jinnah and his successors allowed Yar Khan to retain his title until the states's dissolution in 1955. On 3 October 1952, as one of the princely states of Pakistan, Kalat entered into the Baluchistan States Union with three neighbouring states, Kharan, Las Bela, and Makran, with Yar Khan at the head of the Union with the title of Khan-e-Azam. The Khanate came to an end on 14 October 1955, when it was incorporated into West Pakistan.Farhan Hanif Siddiqi, The Politics of Ethnicity in Pakistan: The Baloch, Sindhi and Mohajir Ethnic Movements (Routledge, 2012), pp. 58–62 Yar Khan briefly declared himself Khan again in defiance of the Pakistani state from June to October 1958. On 6 October 1958, the Pakistani government arrested and imprisoned Yar Khan on sedition charges during the 1958 Pakistani coup d'état against President Iskander Mirza but later released him and briefly restored his title in 1962. His arrest triggered an insurgent uprising led by Nauroz Khan in 1959. ==Legacy== Yar Khan's eldest son, Mir Suleman Dawood Jan, assumed the title of Khan of Kalat upon his father's death in 1979. On Dawood Jan's death his son Suleman Daud Jan became new Khan of Kalat. He has lived in exile in London since the death of Akbar Bugti in 2006. Chief Minister Abdul Malik Baloch and Sanaullah Zehri have asked him to return to Pakistan. Yar Khan's younger sons, Prince Mohyuddin Baloch and grandson Umer Daud Khan, are both politicians in Pakistan. ==Publications== * Mir Ahmad Yar Khan Baluch, Inside Baluchistan: A Political Autobiography of Khan-e-Azam Mir Ahmad Yar Khan Baluch, Ex-ruler of Kalat State (Royal Book Company: 1975) == Further reading == * * ==References== ==External links== * * Category:1902 births Category:1979 deaths Category:Indian knights Category:Khans of Kalat Category:Knights Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire Category:Princely rulers of Pakistan Category:Pakistani royalty Category:Nawabs of Pakistan Category:Governors of Balochistan, Pakistan Category:Baloch people Category:Nawabs of Balochistan, Pakistan