Arthur Fritiof Lundblom (1900–1991) was an American Swedish physician, writer and beekeeper. == Biography == Arthur Lundblom was born on 15 July 1900 in New York City, United States, to Alrik Lundblom, a sea captain och ship builder master at Djurgården shipyard, and Bertha Georgina (née Lindgren). He grew up in New York City, the Azores and on Djurgården in Stockholm, and married the nurse Mona (née Ljungström), daughter of Fredrik Ljungström. Brother-in-law to Emil Carelius and father-in-law to :sv:Claes Sylwander. After Licentiate of Medicine with specialty in orthopaedics at Stockholms högskola, future Stockholm University, he was occupied as regiment military physician at Life Guard Dragoons and Svea Engineer Corps. He also served as counselor for the predecessor of the National Agency for Education, as a surgeon in own private clinic, as well as with plague hospitals in Africa. As an expert in beekeeping, he served for the Swedish Beekeepers Association in evaluations of bee races suitable for the Swedish climate etc. Besides articles and essays in scientific publications, he authored the book Honungsbiet i Saga och Sanning (English: "The honey bee in saga and reality") (1959) the same year he won "10 000-kronorsfrågan" on bees in Kvitt eller dubbelt with Nils Erik Bæhrendtz on SVT. In 1967 his documentary film Honungsjakt och pilgift (English: "Honey hunt and arrow poison") together with :sv:Nils Linnman was broadcast on SVT, about honeyguides and the Maasai people in the newly established Maasai Mara game reserve in Kenya. Arthur Lundblom died on 9 April 1991 and was buried at Norra begravningsplatsen in Stockholm. ==Biblio- and filmography== * On Congenital Ulnar Deviation of the Fingers of Familial Occurrence in :sv:Acta Orthopaedica, Volume 3, 1932 Issue 3 * Honungsbiet i Saga och Sanning (Natur & Kultur 1959) * Stora biboken – människan och biet genom tiderna (:sv:Dag W. Scharp 1966, editorial staff together with :sv:Åke Hansson och :sv:Nils Pellmyr) * Honungsjakt och pilgift (1967) (together with :sv:Nils Linnman) ==Distinctions== * "10 000-kronorsfrågan" on bees in Kvitt eller dubbelt on SVT * Royal Patriotic Society: medal of merit in beekeeping * Swedish Beekeepers Association: honorary plaque ==References== Category:1900 births Category:1991 deaths Category:20th-century American male writers Category:20th-century American physicians Category:20th-century Swedish male writers Category:20th-century Swedish physicians Category:American military doctors Category:American orthopedic surgeons Category:Burials at Norra begravningsplatsen Category:Military personnel from New York City Category:Physicians from New York City Category:Stockholm University alumni Category:Swedish food writers Category:Swedish military doctors Category:Swedish orthopedic surgeons Category:Swedish surgeons Category:Swedish television personalities Category:Television personalities from New York City Category:Writers from New York City Category:20th-century American writers Category:20th-century surgeons Category:American beekeepers Category:Swedish beekeepers Category:American emigrants to Sweden Category:American expatriates in Portugal